[Music]
fifteen loyalty security while domestic
loyalty and security matters with regard
to potential and actual federal
employees have been treated with concern
during World War two investigations in
pursuit of these ends became more
vigorous with the onset of the Cold War
and the Communist Menace perceived in
the late 1940s and 1950s the signal for
this heightened probing of public
employee political sentiments generally
conducted by the civil service
Commission's Bureau of personnel
investigations and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation some agencies such as the
Atomic Energy Commission and the armed
service departments had their own
personnel investigative services was
probably President Truman's March 21st
1947 directive establishing a
government-wide loyalty security program
and an organizational framework for its
administration quote when President
Truman issued his 1947 executive order
initiating the loyalty security program
for federal employees he struck a new
note in the expanded concept of
executive powers in all previous
peacetime loyalty testing experience
Congress rather than president had taken
the lead controversy greeted the order
some critics condemned it as totally
unnecessary others as needful but
excessively rigorous and still others as
too mild Truman may well have headed off
more stringent congressional action in
this arena but former interior secretary
Harold Hicks insisted that the order
resulted from cabinet hysteria
engendered by Attorney General Tom C
Clark's pressures upon the president the
listing of alleged subversive
organizations association with which
equated disloyalty for a federal
official by the Attorney General has
been one of the most fertile sources of
disagreement never before in American
history even during war crises and the
government officially established public
black lists for security purposes the
vast literature supporting and
condemning the executive
loyalty order has searched deeply into
complex and contradictory aspects of
contemporary American life American
liberals had long crusaded for the kind
of executive initiative that truman
exhibited but exempted the field of
civil rights from governmental
interference even in the cause of
security conservatives who decried
extensions of federal functions demanded
that the security program increase in
rigor scope and effectiveness
disagreement centers upon the means the
program used rather than the ends that
sought the nation's servants it seemed
could not have their positions and at
the same time enjoy traditional
privileges of citizenship end quote
footnote Harold M Hyman to try men's
souls loyalty tests in American history
Berkeley and Los Angeles
University of California Press 1959 page
334 in brief the president's order
required a loyalty investigation of
every individual entering federal
employment this inquiry was to be
conducted by the Civil Service
Commission in most cases sources to be
consulted in such a probe included FBI
civil service Armed Forces intelligence
and House Committee on unamerican
Activities committees files as well as
those of quote any other appropriate
government investigative or intelligence
agency end quote
pertinent local law enforcement holdings
the applicants school college and prior
employment records and references given
by the prospective employee Department
and agency heads were responsible for
removing disloyal employees and
appointed loyalty boards composed of not
less than three representatives from
their unit to hear loyalty cases a
loyalty review board within the Civil
Service Commission examined cases where
an employee was being dismissed from the
federal government for reason of
disloyalty activities and associations
of an applicant or employee which might
be considered in connection with the
determine
of disloyalty included one or more of
the following a sabotage espionage or
attempts or preparations therefore or
knowingly associating with spies or
saboteurs be treason or sedition or
advocacy thereof see advocacy of
revolution or force or violence to alter
the constitutional form of government of
the United States d intentional
unauthorized disclosure to any person
under circumstances which may indicate
disloyalty to the United States of
documents or information of a
confidential or non-public character
obtained by the person making the
disclosure as a result of his employment
by the government of the United States
II performing or attempting to perform
his duties or otherwise acting so as to
serve the interests of another
government in preference to the
interests of the United States F
membership in affiliation with or
sympathetic association with any foreign
or domestic organization Association
movement group or combination of persons
designated by the Attorney General as
totalitarian fascist communist or
subversive or as having adopted a policy
of advocating or approving the
commission of acts of force or violence
to deny other persons their rights under
the Constitution of the United States or
as seeking to alter the form of
government of the United States by
unconstitutional means and quote while
the program raised a variety of
questions regarding the civil rights of
federal employees it also generated a
cache of information of intelligence
interest but of questionable quality
quote the loyalty testing problem
remained to face Republican President
Dwight Eisenhower soon after he assumed
office Eisenhower modified the loyalty
testing program his 1953 directive
decentralized the security apparatus to
the agency level and altered the
criteria for dismissal to include
categories of security risks homosexuals
alcoholics persons
undergoing psychiatric treatment without
reference to subversion but security
risk and disloyalty had already become a
fixed duo in the public mind the
Eisenhower modification which eliminated
the loyalty review board did not
basically alter the loyalty testing
structure other executive orders and
legislative requirements have extended
loyalty security processes to passport
applicants port employees industrial
workers American officials in the United
Nations recipients of government
research grants and scientists engaged
in official research and development
programs the military services and the
Atomic Energy Commission recently
dissolved to form the energy research
and development administration and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission conducted
their own clearance procedures the
American national government in short
has been involved in an unending almost
two dozen year-long search for
subversives now effective this drive has
been no one has yet satisfactorily
proved end quote the Civil Service
Commission continues to conduct most of
these investigations for the majority of
federal agencies the defense
investigative service performs the
personnel clearance function for Defense
Department employees and may provide
assistance to other entities in these
matters at the direction of the
Secretary of Defense
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you